# The V1 format

The V1 format was the first data format produced for the timetable generator and was used by the front-end throughout its existence.

## Format

The V1 format will be described as it exists as JSON, since its implementation today only exists as an adapter from V2. The original library was lost a long time ago.

Examples will be taken from _The University of Western Ontario_.

### The root

The root of a V1 data format for some university looks like this:

```json
{
  "departments": { ... },
  "courses": { ... },
}
```

#### `departments`

The `departments` key points to a map of the human readable name of each department to its code.

For example:

```json
{
    "Chemistry": "CHEM"
}
```

The values are used as keys for looking up courses for a certain department under `courses`.

#### `courses`

`courses` is a map of department codes to arrays of courses.

```json
{
    "CHEM": [<course_1>, <course_2>, ..., <course_n>]
}
```

#### `course`

A `course` has the following format.

```json
{
    "name": "INTRODUCTORY CHEMISTRY I",
    "code": "CHEM 0011A",
    "term": 1,
    "credits": 0.5,
    "core": [<section_1>, <section_2>, .., <section_n>],
    "lab":  [<section_1>, <section_2>, .., <section_n>],
    "tutorial":  [<section_1>, <section_2>, .., <section_n>],
}
```

|Field|Description|
|-----|-------------|
| `name`| The name of the course as it appears in the school's documentation.|
|`code`| The code for the course as it appears in the school's documentation. This is always joined with the department as a prefix.|
|`term`| The term the course occurs in. 1 signifies "fall semester", 2 "winter semester" and 3 "full year"|
|`credits`|A double representing the number of credits/units a course is worth.|
|`core`|Scheduled lecture sections (not present if irrelevant).|
|`lab`|Scheduled lab sections (not present if irrelevant).|
|`tutorial`|Scheduled tutorial sections (not present if irrelevant).|

#### `section`

A `section` represents a schedulable repeating instance of the course. They are identical for `core`, `lab`, and `tutorial` in their format.

```json
{
    "name": "001",
    "serial": "1774",
    "supervisors: ["Lausch"],
    "times": [<time_1>, <time_2>, ..., <time_n>]
}
```

|Field|Description|
|-----|-------------|
| `name`| The name of the section as it appears in the school's documentation. Any prefixes are stripped.|
|`serial`| The serial number for the section. Some schools use these during registration. Not present if irrelevant.|
|`supervisors`|A list of instructor/supervisor names as strings. First and last name are always a single string.|
|`times`|Time records for when this section occurs.|


#### `time`

A `time` is an array where the elements represent when the course occurs.

```json
[3, "mo", 10, 30, 12, 30, "UC-3225"]
```

|Element|Description|
|-----|-------------|
|0|The term the record is relevant to (1, 2, or 3) |
|1| The day of the week the period is relevant to (mo, tu, we, th, fr, sa, su)|
|2|The starting hour.|
|3|The starting minute.|
|4|The ending hour.|
|5|The ending minute.|
|6|The location (usually building + room).|

## Design decisions

The V1 format was designed with solely McMaster University in mind. Adding support for additional universities was an after thought. This format would have been dropped much sooner had it been easy to migrate the front end. Unfortunately, front end frameworks were not yet prevalent when the timetable generator was first created, meaning a lot of what is essentially hardcoding.

## Deficiencies

The V1 format is very lacking for a number of reasons.

### Looking up courses by array index
The most serious issue was with how courses are presented. Courses are presented as _arrays_ under departments. The primitive saved-schedule system basically just took a carbon copy of the current state of all select-box indexes in the UI and saved that. If any courses were removed/added, it would shift the array, and therefore make any saved schedules invalid or change unexpectedly.

Having a universal ID for each course could have fixed this, rather than relying on array indexes.

### Only three section types

While core, lab, and tutorial worked well for some universities, the majority have many more sections than that. The interim solution was to just map the sections for universities with lots of section types to one of those three that fit best (e.g. core and seminar would map to core for some university X).

Obviously, properly supporting _dynamic_ section types would be preferable when supporting more universities.

### Only three term types

Having a first semester, second semester, and full year designation isn't even sufficient for McMaster, which also has a summer term. Many universities also operate on quarter systems. Significantly more term types are necessary to properly support a large number of schools.

### `time` as an array is confusing and pointless

This was a "space saving" technique to keep the size of the JSON payload down, rather than using a key-value pair, which is much easier to understand. This is completely pointless given that turning on outbound `gzip` compression on any modern web proxy (e.g. `nginx`) is trivial.

### Stripping `section` name prefixes is confusing and pointless

Another space-saving technique was to remove prefixes from section codes since they could (probably?) be inferred. This saved almost no space at the cost of confusion and complexity in the code.